Blog: How we built web analytics (#9737)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/how-we-built-web-analytics.md

---
title: The hard parts of building a Google Analytics alternative
date: 2024-10-24
author:
 - lior-neu-ner
 - robbie-coomber
rootpage: /blog
featuredImage: >- 
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/mobile_replay_7ff47733d8.png
featuredImageType: full
tags:
 - Guides
---

Last month we finally launched [web analytics](/web-analytics), our Google Analytics alternative 🎉 You would think for a company that already does [product analytics](/product-analytics), adding web analytics would be easy. 

Alas, this is not the case. It took <TeamMember name="Robbie Coomber" /> a year to do it, and it's not because he's lazy. 

Fundametally, they have different use cases and thus require different architectures. In this post, we dive into the differences between the two, the challenges we faced, and how we solved them.

![Photo of Robbie being lazy](placeholder)
<Caption>Robbie. He's definitely not lazy.</Caption>

> ## The difference between web and product analytics

Reviewer: What I think this piece is missing is a strong **why**. 

- Why did we build web analytics when we already had product analytics?
- Why did we need to make it cheaper and faster?

A potential outline to fix this:

1. Why web analytics needs to be cheaper (the business case)
    - Google Analytics is free (theoretically)
    - Other low cost competitors
    - We expect users to be larger volume, with lower user LTV. More B2C, rather than B2B.
    - This also means more data to query, which users expect to be super fast. Google Analytics is fast.
    - If we just built web analytics with our existing product analytics setup, it wouldn't be fast or cheap enough for our high volume users
2.  How we made it cheaper (Making web analytics cheaper)
    - Person processing was the big cost. Maybe some inspo here: https://github.com/PostHog/posthog.com/pull/8118
    - Solution: Added anonymous events + explain
3. How we made it faster (Making web analytics faster)
    - Luckily, the queries are the same or very similar every time, we can make a lot of optimizations
    - Product analytics data is across many granules
    - Solution: Optimizing queries, session tables, granules
4. End

To understand the reasons why, let's dive into each one in detail.

### 1. Why web analytics is cheaper

In web analytics, everything is session-based. A session consists of multiple events. Each event has properties set on it, such as the URL, device, and geolocation. When you query data, properties are read from the event. 

This also means that in web analytics, there's no concept of a "person". So you cannot query based on person properties. For example, you cannot filter queries based on the date a user first signed up.

Contrast this to product analytics, where each user has a person profile. This means that not only do events have properties, but so do people. For example, you might want to query based on the date a user first signed up. 

![Web events vs product events](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/events_6caabf2705.png)

Person properties change frequently too, since every event may have data that could be relevant to the user. For example, the URL of the last page they visited, or the most recent browser they used are important properties to store.

> This requires creating and storing a person profile for each user. Usually, we use [ClickHouse](https://posthog.com/blog/how-we-turned-clickhouse-into-our-eventmansion) for our data storage. However, ClickHouse is optimized for storing larges amounts of data that never changes (like events). But since person properties can change frequently, we store them in Postgres.

Reviewer: AFAIK "Person on events" means we store person properties in ClickHouse as well.

![Processing events for web analytics vs product analytics](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/Untitled_2023_07_04_1645_efb32323b9.png)

> Including PostGres in our data pipeline introduces more overhead. There are also other edge cases to consider. For example, it's possible for a user to have multiple profiles created for them (for example, if they log in on different devices). We then need to merge these duplicate profiles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Including Postgres in our data pipeline introduces more overhead. There are also other edge cases to consider. For example, it's possible for a user to have multiple profiles created for them (for example, if they log in on different devices). We then need to merge these duplicate profiles.
```

But why is product analytics slower? When you have millions of events, the best way to optimize query performance is do sampling. But this is not possible for product analytics. Let's have a look at why:

As mentioned above, we use ClickHouse to store our events. It stores rows in blocks called "granules", and each granule contains about 8,000 rows. When you need to read a single row, you need to load an entire granule.

Now, in web analytics, it's easy to sample events from a single session since all the events are highly likely to be stored together in a single granule.

However, for product analytics, their data is likely to spread across multiple granules. This is because a single user is likely to have multiple IDs over time (for example, if they logged in on different devices). As a result, if you need to sample events from a single user, you still need to load all the granules. So you don't get the performance benefits of sampling.

![image of clickhouse granules](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/granules_f969035f22.png)

## Our solution

### 1. How we improved costs

> Robbie came up with [anonymous events](https://posthog.com/blog/anonymous-events). These are to be used for web analytics, while our existing product analytics would continue to use our regular events (now called **identified events**).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Robbie came up with [anonymous events](/docs/data/anonymous-vs-identified-events). These are to be used for web analytics, while our existing product analytics would continue to use our regular events (now called **identified events**).
```
